PTCL-NOS-GATA3	

Microscopic Description
Sections show a voluminous dermic and subcutaneous mags with ulceration and no epidermotropism. It is composed of a diffuse proliferation of pleomorphic medium to large sized lymphoid cells with scant cytoplasm, coarse chromatin and occasionally prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures are very frequent. The malignant infiltrate is adjacent to the deep surgical margin.

By immunchistochemistry done at ERRH and BCCA the atypical cells express strong CD2, CD3 (membrane), CD4, CD5, BCL2 and strong uniform GATA3. The cells are negative for CD7, CD8, CD10, CD30, BCL6, CXCL13, PD1 and cytotoxic markers TIA1, granzyme B and perforin. Both CD20+ B cells and CD8+ reactive T cells are very rare. Follicular structures are not seen (CD21). EBV EBER ISH is negative. The proliferation rate (Ki67) is very high in the atypical cells, approximately 80%.

In summary, this biopsy shows a T cell lymphoma with medium to large sized cell morphology and phenotypic features consistent with peripheral I cell lymphoma, NOS. The increased proliferation rate and strong GATA3 expression (likely T-helper differentiation) are proposed markers of poor prognosis.



PTCL-NOS	
Microscopic Description 
Sections show a voluminous lymph node with complete effacement of the nodal architecture by an atypical lymphoid infiltrate with a diffuse pattern. The morphology varies throughout the sections with areas of dense cellularity composed of small to medium sized atypical lymphoid cells with scant cytoplasm and irregular nuclei with coarse chromatin. Occasional larger atypical cells are noted with more dispersed chromatin and prominent nucleoli. These cells are admixed with frequent eosinophils, plasma and scattered histiocytes. In other areas fewer atypical lymphoid cells are admixed with abundant clusters of reactive histiocytes with frequent multinucleated and Langhans-like cells within a fibrotic stroma. Reed-Sternberg cells are not identified. Focal areas of necrosis are also seen. Mitotic figures and apoptotic bodies are noted. The skin biopsy shows a skin fragment with a upper to mid dermis perivascular lymphoid infiltrate. It is composed of small to medium sized lymphoid cells, some with slight atypical features including irregular nuclei and coarse chromatin. Angiodestructive lesions are not noted. Microorganisms stains done at ARH on the lymph node fragment are negative. 

Flow cytometry performed on the fresh lymph node tissue immunophenotypically abnormal CD2+, showed an CDS+, CD7-, CD4+, CD10-, CD25-/+, CD30- CD45RA-, CD45RO+, CD56-, CD57-, CD279- population of cells. 

By immunchistochemistry done at ARH and BCCA the atypical cells express strong CD2, CD3, CD and CD5 and are negative for CD7, CD, CD10, CD25, CD30, BCL2, BCL6, CXCL13, PD1, TIA1, perforin and granzyme B. CD20+ B cells are rare and confined to the capsule. Frequent reactive-looking small CD8+/TIA1+ cells are also noted. CD21 does highlight focal and rare residual EDC meshwork underlying the B cells areas. The plasma cells are polytypic. The CD68 highlights the variable but focally very abundant histiocytic infiltrate. EBV EBER ISH is negative on the atypical cells. In the skin sections the majority of the lymphoid cells are CD3+ T cells which significant show 1039 of CD7 and BCL2 in the atypical cells. The proliferations rate (Ki67) of the atypical cells in the lymph node is very high, approximately 80%. 

In summary, the nodal biopsy shows a T cell Lymphoma with abundant reactive histiocytes with morphology and phenotypic features consistent with peripheral T cell lymphoma, NOS. The skin infiltrate is consistent with involvement by same disease. The abundant histiocytic cell content in the lymph node suggests a lymphoepithelioid variant of PTCL, NOS (Lennert's Lymphoma). 


SPECIMEN(S)
A	Retroperitoneal Lymph Node Core Biopsy

ADDENDUM COMMENT
External Consult (second opinion) to University Health Network
2026-Feb-09 09:31:01

A consultation report has been received and can be viewed as a scanned report.

Consultation Accession No.:  S26-5841 from Dr. Jiong Yan at University Health Network, 200 Elizabeth St., Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4.

FINAL DIANGOSIS UPDATE:
Most consistent with peripheral T-cell lymphoma, NOS.


Electronically signed by Zhou , Qianghua (Steven)MD, FRCPC - Pathologist
Verified:  23-FEB-2026

DM/QZ

SPECIMEN(S)
A	Retroperitoneal Lymph Node Core Biopsy

CLINICAL HISTORY
Lymphadenopathy NYD.
Time into Formalin: 10:43

DIAGNOSIS
RETROPERITONEAL LYMPH NODE, CORE BIOPSY:

CD4+ T-CELL LYMPHOMA, pending external hematopathology consultation (see comment).


Electronically signed by Zhou , Qianghua (Steven)MD, FRCPC - Pathologist
Verified:  06-FEB-2026

QZ/QZ

COMMENT
The findings are consistent with a CD4+ T-cell lymphoma, most favoring nodal TFH cell lymphoma, NOS (nTFHL-NOS) with aberrant TCL1 expression. Aberrant TCL1 subset positivity is noted; T-prolymphocytic leukemia (T-PLL) is not supported based on morphology, immunophenotype, and available clinical data. TFH markers are positive for PD1, BCL6 (by IHC) and ICOS (by flow cytometry). There is no expansion of follicular dendritic cell meshworks or high endothelial venules, arguing against angioimmunoblastic (nTFHL-AI) or follicular-type (nTFHL-F) nodal TFH lymphomas. However, diagnosis of this entity is ideally made on an excisional biopsy. Case will be referred for UHN hematopathology consultation for diagnostic confirmation. Correlation with imaging and laboratory studies is recommended. T-cell receptor gene rearrangement studies may be performed for clonality confirmation if clinically indicated. Preliminary results were communicated with Dr. L. Liontos (SHSC, Jan 23), S. Ingber (Jan 28) by emails.

GROSS DESCRIPTION
The specimen is received in formalin in a container labelled with the patient's demographic details and as "Retroperitoneal Node". It consists of many cores and fragments of soft white-tan tissue measuring from less than 0.1 cm to 1.1 cm in length and up to less than 0.1 cm in diameter.  A separate core was sent for flow cytometry.
Sections: 1-3 - 3/3 EIT
COLD ISCHEMIC TIME TO BE ENTERED


ML/22-JAN-2026

MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION
Sections of the core biopsy show complete effacement of the nodal architecture by an atypical lymphoid infiltrate with a diffuse pattern. The atypical infiltrate is composed of pleomorphic intermediate to large sized lymphoid cells with vesicular nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, scant cytoplasm. Apoptosis is frequent. These cells are admixed with small lymphocytes and scattered histiocytes. HRS cells, granulomata, necrosis are not present. 

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
The atypical lymphoid cells are T cells expressing CD3, CD2, CD4, CD5, CD43, BCL2, LEF1, and PD1, with subset positivity for TCL1 (5-10%) and BCL6. The atypical cells are negative for CD8 (scattered), CD7 (scattered), CD10, CD56, CD57, and ALK1. CD30 highlights scattered immunoblasts. EBER ISH is negative. CD1a, CD34, TdT, Granzyme B, TIA1 are negative.
Background B cells are highlighted by CD20 and PAX5 and show subset positivity for BCL6 and MUM1; they are negative for CD5, CD10, CD23, CD30, CD43, CMYC, and CyclinD1. 
No residual follicular dendritic cell meshworks are identified by CD21/CD23. 
Ki-67 proliferation index is approximately 80%.

FLOW CYTOMETRY
Flow cytometry performed at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre:
Specimen Integrity: Acceptable
Specimen Cellularity: Suboptimal – Low Cellularity
Specimen Viability: Suboptimal specimen viability (65% by 7-AAD) – Interpret results with caution

Interpretation:  
Flow Cytometry, Tissue Core Biopsy (Retroperitoneal LN):

An Aberrant CD4+ T-cell population is detected (44% of total leukocytes). Interpret with caution, low cellularity and suboptimal specimen viability.

Comment:  

INTERNAL CONSULTATION
Reviewed in consultation with another hematopathologist for QA; diagnostic consensus obtained.
