DIAGNOSIS

Inguinal Lymph Node Core Biopsy, Right
- FOLLICULAR LYMPHOMA, FOLLICULAR GROWTH PATTERN, PRELIMINARY GRADE 1-2 OF 3. Please see comment.

COMMENT

The overall histologic and immunophenotypic findings support a diagnosis of follicular lymphoma, predominantly present in a follicular pattern. Based on the paucity of large cells (less than 15/hpf), the process is classified as low-grade (W.H.O. Grade 1-2 of 3) per the current W.H.O. classification (revised 4th edition, 2017). However, this is a preliminary grading to help inform clinical decision making, definitive grading would require an excisional biopsy. Diagnostic histologic features of involvement by a high-grade or large cell lymphoma are not seen in the sections examined. Correlation with clinical and laboratory findings is advised.

MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION

Sections from the core biopsies reveal the lymph node architecture is diffusely effaced by a predominantly nodular atypical lymphoid proliferation composed primarily of small to intermediate sized lymphoid cells with round to irregular, cleaved nuclei, condensed chromatin, indistinct nucleoli, and a small amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm. Admixed are larger cells with oval to irregular nuclei, vesicular chromatin, prominent nucleoli, and a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm, consistent with centroblasts (less than 15 per HPF).

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY 

The lymphocytes are positive for CD20, CD10, BCL6, and BCL2.  They are negative for CD5, CD21, CD43, MUM1 and Cyclin D1.
CD3 and CD5 highlight interspersed small T cells predominantly in interfollicular zones. 
CD21 highlights expanded, but intact, follicular dendritic cell meshwork. 
The Ki67 proliferation index is overall 30% with focally higher areas (__).

FLOW CYTOMETRY

Flow cytometry performed at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre:
Specimen Integrity:  
Specimen Cellularity:  
Specimen Viability:  

Interpretation:  Bone marrow aspirate, flow cytometric analysis:

Flow cytometric immunophenotyping shows 

Please see scanned Flow Cytometry Report for detailed flow cytometric analysis.

Flow Cytometry Report Accession No


SPECIMEN(S)
A	Lymph Node Core Biopsy, Left Femoral


CLINICAL HISTORY
New enlarged left femoral lymph node, query reactive lymph node Vs lymphoproliferative disease
1 core sent for flow cytometry
Time into Formalin: 11:25

DIAGNOSIS
Lymph node, left femoral, core biopsy:
– Classic follicular lymphoma, low grade.

COMMENT
The overall histologic and immunophenotypic findings support a diagnosis of follicular lymphoma, predominantly present in a follicular pattern. Based on the paucity of large cells (less than 15/hpf), the process is classified as low-grade (Grade 1-2 of 3) per the current WHO classification. However, this is a preliminary grading to help inform clinical decision making, definitive grading would require an excisional biopsy. Diagnostic histologic features of involvement by a high-grade or large cell lymphoma are not seen in the sections examined. Correlation with clinical and laboratory findings is advised.

GROSS DESCRIPTION
The specimen is received in formalin in a container labelled with the patient's demographic details and as " Left Femoral Lymph Node". It consists of many fragments of soft white-tan tissue measuring from less than 0.1 cm to 0.4 cm in length and 0.1 cm in diameter.
Sections: 1-3 many / 3 EIT


JC/21-APR-2026

MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION
Sections of the biopsy show lymph node involved by an atypical lymphoid infiltrate in a vaguely nodular pattern. The infiltrate is composed primarily of small to intermediate sized lymphoid cells with round to irregular/cleaved nuclei, condensed chromatin, indistinct nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm. Admixed are scattered larger centroblastic cells which average less than 15/HPF. No sheets of large cells, necrosis or granulomata are seen.

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
The atypical cells are CD20+, PAX5+, BCL2+, BCL6+ (weak/subset); CD19+/-; CCND1-, CD5-, CD43-, LEF1-. 
CD21 highlight follicular dendritic cell meshworks. 
CD3, CD5 and CD43 highlight interfollicular T cells.
Ki67 proliferation index: 5%.

FLOW CYTOMETRY
Flow cytometry performed at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre:
Specimen Integrity: Acceptable
Specimen Cellularity: Suboptimal – Low cellularity
Specimen Viability: 87% (by 7-AAD)

Interpretation:  
Tissue Core Biopsy (Left Femoral Lymph Node) flow cytometric analysis:
A KAPPA-RESTRICTED CD10 POSITIVE MONOCLONAL B CELL POPULATION IS IDENTIFIED.

Comment:  The cytospin shows small lymphocytes with condensed chromatin. The immunophenotypic findings are compatible with a low grade B cell lymphoproliferative disorder such as follicular lymphoma. Final classification and grading require integration with tissue histology and ancillary studies.


SPECIMEN(S)
A	Retroperitoneal Lymp Node

CLINICAL HISTORY
Retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, NYD. Rule out malignancy, mesenteric lymphadenopathy 
Time into Formalin: 09:21

DIAGNOSIS
Lymph node, retroperitoneal, core biopsy:
- LOW-GRADE CD10-POSITIVE B-CELL LYMPHOMA, see comment.
- Negative for metastasis.

COMMENT
Overall features support a low-grade B-cell lymphoma, most consistent with follicular lymphoma (grade 1–2). The lymphoma cells express CD10 and BCL6 but lack BCL2 expression, which may occur in a subset of cases or reflect epitope-related false-negative immunohistochemistry. FISH for BCL2 rearrangement is pending. No morphologic evidence of transformation is identified.

GROSS DESCRIPTION
The specimen is received in formalin in a container labelled with the patient's demographic details and as "Retroperitoneal Lymph Node". It consists of 4 cores of soft white-tan tissue measuring from 0.6 cm to 1.3 cm in length and up to less than 0.1 cm in diameter.
Sections: 1-3 - 4/3 EIT


ML/27-FEB-2026

MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION
Sections of core biopsy shows effacement of the nodal architecture by poorly defined follicles of varying size. The follicles lack mantle zones and are composed predominantly of centrocytes with only rare centroblasts (<15/HPF). No sheets of large atypical cells, necrosis, or granulomas are identified.

Immunophenotype
By immunohistochemistry
Lymphoma immunophenotype: CD5-, CD10+, CD20+, BCL2-, BCL6+, CCND1-, PAX5+, MKI67+(10%), CD43+, CD23-, LEF1-, AE1/AE3-.
CD21 and CD23 highlight follicular dendritic cell networks.
CD3 and CD5 highlight interfollicular T cells.
By flow cytometry
Performed (see below and separate report for detailed description)

Flow cytometry performed at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre:
Specimen Integrity: Acceptable
Specimen Cellularity: Suboptimal – Low Cellularity
Specimen Viability: 77% (by 7-AAD)

Interpretation:  
Flow Cytometry, Tissue Core Biopsy (Retroperitoneal LN):

A Kappa-restricted CD10+ monoclonal B-cell population is detected (14% of total leukocytes).

Comment:  

INTERNAL CONSULTATION
Reviewed by another hematopathologist for quality assurance; consensus reached.
