DIAGNOSIS

Renal Mass, Left, Biopsy:
-INVOLVEMENT BY LOW-GRADE B CELL NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA, please see comment.  

COMMENT

The findings of a CD5 and CD10 negative small B cell lymphoma are most consistent with MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA, which could be primary to the lymph nodes or represent spread from a mucosal site. The differential diagnosis does include lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and SPEP studies could be helpful if clinically warranted. Correlation with other clinical and laboratory studies is suggested. There is no evidence of a higher grade lesion present, however, undersampling cannot be completely excluded in this biopsy. Correlation with clinical, radiological and other laboratory studies is advised.

GROSS DESCRIPTION

The specimen is received in formalin in a container labelled with the patient's demographic details and as " Left Renal Mass Biopsy". It consists of 5 cores and fragments of soft white-tan tissue measuring from 1.5 cm to 2.3 cm in length and up to 0.1 cm in diameter.
Sections: 1-3 5/3 EIT 

MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION

Sections from the core biopsies show a diffuse, vaguely nodular collection of intermediate sized lymphocytes with irregular nuclei, condensed to vesicular chromatin, and variable amounts of cytoplasm. Patchy areas are present in which the cells have slightly more abundant pale cytoplasm, producing a “monocytoid” appearance. Admixed are scattered larger cells with oval to irregular nuclei, vesicular chromatin, prominent nucleoli, and a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm.

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY

The atypical lymphocytic infiltrate is positive for CD20 and BCL2, and are negative for CD3, CD5, CD10, BCL6, CD43, CD23, and MUM1.
CD3, CD5, and CD43 highlight scattered T cells, predominately associated with residual germinal centers.
CD21 and CD23 highlight small residual follicular dendritic cell meshworks which appear to be colonized by the neoplastic cells.
MUM1 is positive in scattered cells.
The Ki67 proliferation index is approximately 10-20%.

FLOW CYTOMETRY

Flow cytometry performed at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre:
Specimen Integrity:  _
Specimen Cellularity:  _
Specimen Viability:  _
Interpretation:  _
Comment:  _

Flow Cytometry report Accession No.:  _ from Dr. _ at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, 2075 Bayview Ave., Toronto, ON, M4N 3M5.


SPECIMEN(S)
A	Left Inguinal Mass Core Biopsy


CLINICAL HISTORY
Left inguinal mass, rule out lymphoma, breast cancer 2023, re-biopsy recommended
1 core sent for flow cytometry
Time into Formalin: 09:10

DIAGNOSIS
Left inguinal mass, core biopsy:
- B cell lymphoma, most consistent with marginal zone lymphoma. See comment.


COMMENT
Note is made of history of breast cancer. The findings of a CD5 and CD10 negative small B cell lymphoma are most consistent with marginal zone lymphoma, which could be primary to the lymph nodes or represent spread from a mucosal site. The differential diagnosis includes lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and SPEP studies could be helpful if clinically warranted. Correlation with other clinical and laboratory studies is suggested. There is no evidence of a higher grade lesion present, however, undersampling cannot be completely excluded in this biopsy. Correlation with clinical, radiological and other laboratory studies is advised.

GROSS DESCRIPTION
The specimen is received in formalin in a container labelled with the patient's demographic details and as "Left Inguinal Mass". It consists of 2 cores of soft white-tan tissue measuring from 1.6 cm to 1.7 cm in length and up to 0.1 cm in diameter.
Sections: 1,2 - 2/2 EIT


DS/24-APR-2026

MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION
Sections show lymph node tissue with architectural effacement by an atypical lymphoid infiltrate arranged in a diffuse to vaguely nodular pattern. The infiltrate is composed predominantly of small to intermediate-sized lymphocytes with irregular nuclear contours, condensed to focally vesicular chromatin, and variable amounts of pale cytoplasm, imparting a monocytoid appearance in areas. Scattered larger transformed/immunoblast-like cells are present but do not form sheets. Plasma cells are not prominent. Mitotic activity is low. Necrosis and granulomas are not identified.

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
The atypical lymphocytic infiltrate is positive for CD20, PAX5 and BCL2, and are negative for CD3, CD5, CD10, BCL6, CD30, CD43, CMYC, LEF1 and MUM1. CD19 appears to be very weak to negative in B cells.
CD3, CD5, and CD43 highlight scattered T cells.
CD21 highlights only a few small residual follicular dendritic cell meshworks.
The Ki67 proliferation index is approximately 10-20%.
EBER-ish is negative.

FLOW CYTOMETRY
Flow cytometry performed at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre:
Specimen Integrity: Acceptable
Specimen Cellularity: Suboptimal – Low cellularity
Specimen Viability: Suboptimal specimen viability (63% by 7-AAD) – Interpret results with caution

Interpretation:  
Lymph node flow cytometry shows a kappa-restricted CD5- CD10- B-cell population,

Comment:  The differential for a CD5-CD10- small B-cell population is predominately between marginal zone lymphoma vs. lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. Correlation with morphology, histology, immunohistochemistry, cytogenetic investigations, molecular studies, and other ancillary testing is required for final diagnosis.



SPECIMEN(S)
A	Lymph Node Core Biopsy, Left Supraclavicular

CLINICAL HISTORY
Enlarged left supraclavicular lymphadenopathy, query lymphoma
Time into Formalin: 12:55

DIAGNOSIS
Lymph node (left supraclavicular), core biopsy:
- LOW GRADE B-CELL LYMPHOMA CONSISTENT WITH MARGINAL ZONE LYMPHOMA
- See Comment

Electronically signed by Jong  Roland Chuck Kit  MD, FRCPC - Pathologist
Verified:  25-MAY-2023

RCJ/RCJ

COMMENT
The morphology and immunophenotypic features are consistent with marginal zone lymphoma.  Although this may be a primary nodal marginal zone lymphoma, an extranodal marginal zone lymphoma with secondary nodal involvement should be clinically excluded.

GROSS DESCRIPTION
The specimen is received in formalin in a container labelled with the patient's demographic details and as "Left Supraclavicular Lymph Node". It consists of 2 cores and 4 fragments of soft white-tan tissue measuring from 0.1 cm to 1 cm in length and up to 0.1 cm in diameter.
Sections: 1,2 -many/2 EIT 

JC/17-MAY-2023

MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION
Sections show multiple core biopsies of lymph node tissue with diffuse effacement of lymph node architecture by a monotonous small lymphoid cell population showing oval to slightly irregular nuclear contours, indistinct nucleoli and moderate amounts of pale cytoplasm. Few plasmacytoid forms are identified. Large nucleolated forms are rare.

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL STUDIES
Immunostains have been performed on block A1. Greater than 90% of the lymphoid cell population is composed of CD20 positive B-cells with scattered CD3/CD5/CD43 positive T-cells scattered throughout the cores.  There is no evidence of aberrant coexpression of CD5 or CD43 within the B-cell population. There is no significant positivity for cyclin D1.  There is rare scattered positivity for follicle center cell markers bcl-6 and CD10 without well defined aggregates.  Expansile and fragmented CD21 positive follicular dendritic cell meshworks are present over the majority of the surface area of the cores. There is diffuse strong positivity for bcl-2 protein. Immunostaining for kappa and lambda show scattered polytypic plasma cells.  Proliferation index, as assessed by Ki67, is less than 5%.

FLOW CYTOMETRIC STUDIES
Flow cytometry performed at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre:
Specimen Integrity:  Acceptable
Specimen Cellularity:  Suboptimal-Low Cellularity
Specimen Viability:  Suboptimal specimen viability (72% by 7-AAD)-Interpret results with caution

Interpretation:  
CD5-CD10- lambda restricted monoclonal B cell population detected. By forward scatter and cytospin, the B cells are small sized integrate with tissue investigations for further subclassification.

Comment:  

Flow Cytometry report Accession No.:  H23-2629 from Dr. Hubert Tsui at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, 2075 Bayview Ave., Toronto, ON, M4N 3M5.
