DIAGNOSIS

CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA/SMALL LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA (CLL/SLL), please see comment.

COMMENT


MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION

The core biopsies show a diffuse infiltrate of monotonous small lymphocytes with round nuclei, clumped chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and small amounts of cytoplasm admixed with scattered larger cells consistent with prolymphocytes. Areas of clustering of the large cells are seen, consistent with proliferation centers. 

IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY

Immunohistochemical studies show that the cells are positive for CD20(weak), PAX5, CD5, CD23, CD43 and BCL2. They are negative for CD10, BCL6, and Cyclin D1. 
CD21 highlights residual follicular dendritic cell meshworks.
CD3 highlights scattered T cells and is much less than CD5 staining. 
The Ki67 proliferation index is low (XX%).

FLOW CYTOMETRY

Flow cytometry performed at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre:
Specimen Integrity:  _
Specimen Cellularity:  _
Specimen Viability:  _
Interpretation:  _
Comment:  _

Flow Cytometry report Accession No.:  _ from Dr. _ at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, 2075 Bayview Ave., Toronto, ON, M4N 3M5.

SPECIMEN(S)
A	Left Cervical Lymph Node Core Biopsy


CLINICAL HISTORY
Enlarged lymph glands initially in neck, now very large in both axilla and abdominal pelvic nodes. Query lymphoma.
Time into Formalin: 09:00

DIAGNOSIS
Lymph node, left cervical, core biopsy:
– Small lymphocytic lymphoma / chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

COMMENT
Relatively small biopsy with crush artefacts shows a diffuse infiltrate of atypical small lymphoid cells with round nuclei and scant cytoplasm. Limited panel of immunohistochemistry was ordered and shows the atypical infiltrate is composed of CD20 weak B cells and CD3 strong T cells. B cells are negative for CD10 and BCL6. BCL2 highlights strong positive T cells and relatively weak B cells. Ki67 proliferation index is low (10 to 15%). Flow cytometry demonstrated a kappa-restricted CD5+ B cell population of 39% of CLL/SLL immunophenotype. 

GROSS DESCRIPTION
The specimen is received in formalin in a container labelled with the patient's demographic details and as "Left Cervical Lymph Node". It consists of 2 fragments of soft white-tan tissue each measuring 0.1 cm in greatest dimension
Sections: 2/1 EIT


DS/23-APR-2026

MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION
Flow cytometry performed at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre:
Specimen Integrity: Acceptable
Specimen Cellularity: Suboptimal – Low cellularity
Specimen Viability: Suboptimal specimen viability (19% by 7-AAD) – Interpret results with caution

Interpretation:  
Lymph node flow cytometry shows a kappa-restricted CD5+ B-cell population,

Comment:  The immunophenotype is most consistent with a chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL) phenotype. Correlation with peripheral lymphocyte count and peripheral blood flow cytometry is recommended to differentiate between CLL and SLL.


SPECIMEN(S)
A	Duodenum Stricture Biopsy
B	Duodenum Mass Biopsy


ADDENDUM COMMENT
Duodenum, stricture, biopsy: involvement by small lymphocytic lymphoma / chronic lymphocytic leukemia

COMMENT
The biopsy shows a small infiltrate of monotonous small lymphocytes with round nuclei, clumped chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm, with scattered prolymphocytes. Immunohistochemistry demonstrates a CD19+ PAX5+ B-cell population coexpressing BCL2, CD23, and weak LEF1, and negative for CD5, CD10, BCL6, Cyclin D1, and CD20. Ki-67 proliferation index is low (<5%). CD3 and CD5 highlight scattered background T cells.

Note is made of known CLL. The atypical B cell infiltrate shows CD23 and LEF1 positivity, supporting CLL/SLL. Loss of CD5 expression is an uncommon but recognized immunophenotypic variation, particularly in previously treated or evolving disease.


SPECIMEN(S)
A	Right Hamicolectomy


ADDENDUM COMMENT
A23. Lymph node, excisional:
- Small lymphocytic lymphoma / chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Clinical History
Known CLL

Specimen type
Excisional biopsy

Specimen quality
Adequate

Tissue type
Lymph node

Morphological description
The sections of the lymph node show a diffuse infiltrate of monotonous small lymphocytes with round nuclei, clumped chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm, with scattered prolymphocytes.

Immunophenotype
By immunohistochemistry
Lymphoma immunophenotype: CD5+, CD10-, CD20±, BCL2+, BCL6-, CCND1-, PAX5+, CD19+, CD43+, LEF1+.
Follicular dendritic cells: CD21 highlights small residual follicular dendritic cell networks.
Interfollicular area: CD3 highlights interfollicular T cells.
Proliferation index
Ki67 staining: 5% (overall)
By flow cytometry
Not performed

