Diagnosis
AML (follow up post BMT):
1. In remission with <3% blasts. Flow cytometry for MRD is negative. NPM1 molecular studies are pending. Suggest correlation with chimerism studies.
2. Normocellular bone marrow aspirate with trilineage hematopoiesis and no overt dysplasia. No CBC or peripheral blood film supplied. Biopsy is suboptimal for assessment.
Synoptic Data
MATERIALS RECEIVED
--Bone marrow trephine biopsy
Bone marrow biopsy: Inadequate because: 0.4cm of which 0.2 cm represents periosteal tissue and cortical bone and the remaining 0.2 cm is severely hypocellular subcortical marrow.
Biopsy Length: < 0.5cm
Bony Trabeculae: Unremarkable
--Bone marrow aspirate
Bone marrow aspirate: Adequate quality
Aspirate fragments: Present
Aspirate Cellularity: Normocellular
Clot Section: The clot section contains marrow fragments
DESCRIPTION
Erythropoiesis: Normocellular
Morphology: mainly normoblastic
Ring sideroblasts are absent
Granulopoiesis: Normocellular
Morphology: mainly normoblastic
Megakaryopoiesis: Normocellular
Morphology: mainly normoblastic
Monocytes: Not increased
Mast Cells: Not increased
Lymphocytes: Not increased
Plasma cells: Not increased
Iron stores: Normal
Neoplasia: : see diagnosis
Other Findings: : Aspirate: Blasts <3%. Biopsy: Cortical bone and periosteal tissue. Small areas of severe hypocellular subcortical marrow with scattered granulopoieis and erythropoiesis and no large clusters of blasts.
--------------------------------------------------------
Electronically verified by:
Clinical History
Clinical History: AML FLT3+ NPM1+ D+205; rpt BM for MRD assessment
Purpose of Test: Follow-up of Known Diagnosis
Diagnosis: Acute myeloid leukemia
Reason for Marrow: Remission status
Specific Request: Molecular follow up needed
Comment: *** NPM1 qPCR pls
Number of Specimens: 5
Flow Cytometry Status: Signed Out
Interpretation
CD34+ and CD117+/CD34- myeloid precursors account for 0.34% and 0.9% total cells respectively.
The CD34-/CD117+ myeloid precursors do not demonstrate the previously seen leukemic immunophenotypic changes. The CD117+/CD34- myeloid precursors are comprised of the normal subsets.
The following distribution of the major cell populations is as shown: 81% granulocytes, 4.7% lymphocytes, 2.7% monocytes, 6% erythroid precursors.
Granulocytic and monocytic maturation patterns within normal limits.
In conclusion, residual CD34-/CD117+ leukemic cells are not detected. (the lower level of detection is ~0.1% of total cells).
The following antigens are analyzed: CD7, CD10, CD11b, CD13, CD16, CD19, CD33, CD34, CD36, CD45, CD56, CD71, CD105, CD117, HLA-DR
Molecular Diagnostics Status: Signed Out
Interpretation
Results: Undetectable
Specimen tested: Bone marrow
Cancer Cytogenetics Status: Signed Out
Interpretation
Fixed cells are available for cytogenetic testing (karyotyping and/or FISH), if required.